# C11. Multithreaded Programming

Java provides built-in support for multithreaded programming

##### two distinct types of multitasking
1. process-based
    - A process is, in essence, a program that is executing
    - process-based multitasking allows computer to run two or more programs concurrently.
2. thread-based
    - the thread is the smallest unit of dipatchable code
    - a single program can perform two or more tasks simultaneously

##### Multitasking threads require less overhead than multitasking processes
- processes are heavyweight tasks that require their own separate address spaces
    + interprocess communication is expensive and limited
    + context switching from one process to another is also costly
- threads are lighter weight
    + they share the same address space and cooperatively share the same heavyweight process
    + interthread communication is inexpensive, and context switching from one thread to the next is lower in cost

##### multithreading reduce the idle time

## 1. The Java Thread Model

##### Single-thread vs multithread
1. single-thread
    - use an approach called an *event loop* with *polling*
    - single-thread system runs in an infinite loop, polling a single event queue
    - a thread can block the entire program 
2. multithreading
    - one thread can pause without stopping other parts of your program

##### single-core system and multi-core system
- in single-core system, each thread receiving a slice of CPU time. idle CPU time is utilized
- in multi-core system, it is possible for multiple threads to execute simultaneously.

##### Threads exist in several states
- *running*
- *ready to run*
- *suspended*: temporarily halts its activity
- *resumed*: resume a suspended thread
- *blocked*: when waiting for a resource
- *terminated*: at any time, helts its execution immediately. cannot be resumed

### 1.1 Thread Priorities

##### Java assigns to each thread a priority that determines how that thread should be treated with respect to the others
- Thread priorities are integers
- is used to decide when to switch from one running thread to the next - *context switch*

#####the rules that determine when a context switch takes place
- A thread can voluntarily relinquish control.
- A thread can be preempted by a higher-priority thread.

### 1.2 Synchronization

make sure different threads don't conflict with each other. e.g. prevent writing data while in the middle of reading it.

##### monitor - a control mechanism
once a thread enters a monitor, all orhter threads must wait until that thread exits the monitor

##### In Java, (no class Monitor), each object has its own implicit monitor
automatically entered when one of the object's synchronized methods is called.
once a thread is inside a synchronized method, no other thread can call any other synchronized method on the same object.

### 1.3 Messaging

Java's messaging system allows a thread to enter a synchronized method on any object, and then wait there until some other thread explicitly notifies it to come out.

### 1.4 The Thread Class and the Runnable Interface

Java's multithreading system is built upon the **Thread** class, its methods, and its companion interface, **Runnable**.

## 2. The Main Thread

##### main thread begins running immdiately when a Java program starts up.
- often the main thread must be the last thread to finish running.

> static Thread currentThread()

e.g. Thread t = Thread.currentThread(); t.setName("new thread")

##### By default, 
- the name of the amin thread is **main**
- priority is **5**
- name of the group of threads is **main** (thread group is a data structure that controls the state of a conllection of threads as a whole)

## 3. Creating a Thread

##### instantiating an object of type *Thread* to create a thread
- implementing the **Runnable** interface
- extending the **Thread** class

### 3.1 Implementing Runnable

##### a class that implements Runnable interface. it need only implement a single method called run()
> public void run()

run() can call other methods, use other classes... just like the main thread can. but, it establishes the entry point for another concurrent thread of execution within the program. This thread will end when run() returns.

##### instantiate an object of type Thread within the class
> Thread(Runnable threadOb, String threadName)

##### after new thread is created, call start() method to run
> void start()

```java
class NewThread implements Runnable {
    Thread t;

    NewThread() {
        t = new Thread(this, "Demo"); // instantiate thread object
        t.start(); // Start the thread
    }

    public void run() { // override run()
        null; // do something
    }
}
// in main(): new NewThread(); // create a new thread

```

### 3.2 Extending Thread

##### a new class that extends Thread

```java
class NewThread extends Thread {

    NewThread() {
        super("Demo"); // create a new thread
        start(); // start the thread
    }

    public void run() {
        null; // do something
    }
}
// in main(): new NewThread();

```

### 3.3 Choosing an Approach

only overriding run() method -> implements Runnable
extends Thread -> cannot extends others

## 4. Creating Multiple Threads
..an example with multiple threads..

## 5. Using isAlive() and join()

##### two ways to determine whether a thread has finished
1. isAlive()
    - return true if still running
    - > final boolean isAlive()
2. join()
    - waits until the thread on which it is called terminates
    - > final void join() throws InterruptedException
    - allow to specify a maximum amount of time 

## 6. Thread Priorities

##### in practice, the amount of CPU time that a thread tgets often depends on several factors besides its priority. (e.g. operating system..)
yield control occasionally so that other threads can run

##### set priority
> final void setPriority(int level)
> final int getPriority()

- MIN_PRIORITY -> 1
- MAX_PRIORITY -> 10
- NORM_PRIORITY -> 5

##### safest way to obtain predictable, cross-platform behavior with Java is to use threads that voluntarily give up control of the CPU

## 7. Synchronization

##### Java provides unique, language-level support for *synchronization*
- A *monitor* is an object that is used as a mutually exclusive lock.
    + a thread **entered** the monitor to acquires a lock
    + suspend other threads until the first **exits** the monitor
    + other threads are **waiting** for the monitor

### 7.1 Using Synchronized Methods
in Java, all objects have their own implicit monitor associated with them

##### synchronized keyword
```java
class Callme {
    synchronized void call(String msg) { // serialize access to call()
        null; // do something
    }
}

class Caller implements Runnable {
    String msg;
    Callme target;
    Thread t;

    public Caller (Callme tar, String m) {
        target = tar;
        msg = m;
        t = new Tread(this);
        t.start();
    }
    public void run() {
        target.call(msg);
    }
}

class Synch {
    public static void main(String args[]) {
        Callme target = new Callme();
        Caller c1 = new Caller(target, "msg1");
        Caller c2 = new Caller(target, "msg2");

        try {
            c1.t.join();
            c2.t.join();
        } catch(InterruptedException e) { // if using Thread.sleep
            null; // print...
        }
    }
}

```

### 7.2 The synchronized Statement

##### adding synchronized to method that don't have access to source code
- put calls to methods inside a synchronized block

> synchronized(objectRef) {
>   // statements to be synchronized
> }

e.g. modify above example by change run() method to below and remove synchronized keyword from Callme
```java
public void run() {
    synchronized(target) { // synchronized block
        target.call(msg);
    }
}
```

## 8. Interthread Communication

- wait() tells the calling thread to give up the monitor and go to sleep until some other thread enters the same monitor and calls notify() or notifyAll().
    + final void wait() throws InterruptedException
- notify() wakes up a thread that called wait() on the same object.
    + final void notify()
- notifyAll() wakes up all the threads that called wait() on the same object. One of the threads will be granted access.
    + final void notifyAll()

e.g.
```java
class Que {
    int n;
    boolean valueSet = false;

    synchronized int get() {
        while (!valueSet)
            try {
                wait(); // wait until notify is called in the same object
            } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                null; // handle e...
            }
        valueSet = false;
        notify(); // notify the other wait
        return n;
    }
    synchronized void put(int n) {
        while (valueSet)
            try {
                wait();
            } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                null; // handle e..
            }
        this.n = n;
        valueSet = true;
        notify();
    }
}
// thread class to put
// thread class to get
// main class run all thread class, then, put and get run after each other

```

### 8.1 Deadlock

##### occurs when two threads have a circular dependency on a pair of synchronized objects
- In general, it occurs only rarely, when the two threads time-slice in just the right way.
- It may involve more than two threads and two synchronized objects.

## 9. Suspending Resuming, and Stopping Threads

##### suspend(), resume(), and stop() methods are deprecated by Java 2. must not be used for new Java programs
could manually define a suspendFlag and use wait() and notify() to control the treads

e.g.
```java
class NewThread implements Runnable {
    Thread t;
    boolean suspendFlag;

    NewThread(String name) {
        t = new Thread(this, name);
        suspendFlag = false;
        t.start();
    }
    public void run() {
        null; //do something
        try {
            synchronized(this) {
                while (suspendFlag) {
                    wait();
                }
            }
        } catch (InterruptedException e) {
            null; // handle e..
        }
    }
    synchronized void mysuspend() {
        suspendFlag = true;
    }
    synchronized void myresume() {
        suspendFlag = false;
        notify();
    }
}
```

## 10. Obtaining A Thread's State

##### obtain the current state of the thread
> Thread.State getState()

- BLOCK
- NEW
- RUNNABLE
- TERMINATED
- TIMED_WAITING
- WAITING

NEW -> Thread starts -> | RUNNABLE | -> Thread ends -> TERMINATED

BLOCKED <- Waiting for lock <- | RUNNABLE | -> Waiting -> WAITING or TIMED_WAITING

BLOCKED -> Lock acquired -> | RUNNABLE | <- Wait ended <- WAITING or TIMED_WAITING

e.g.
> Thread.State ts = thrd.getState();
> if (ts == Thread.State.RUNNABLE) //..

##### state might be changed only a moment after getState(). -> primarily used for debugging or for prefiling a thread's run-time characteristics.

## 11. Using Multithreading

too many threads can degrade the proformance - context switching

new Fork/Join Framework can automatically scale