# C12. Enumerations, Autoboxing, and Annotations (Metadata)

## 1. Enumerations
beginning with JDK 5

- an enumeration is a list of named constants
- in Java, an enumeration defines a class type

### 1.1 Enumeration Fundamentals

##### created using the enum keyword
```java
enum NewEnum {
    Member1, Member2 // called *enumeration constants*
}
```

- enumeration constants
    + implicitly declared as a public, static final member
    + their type is the type of the enumeration - *self-typed*

##### create a variable of a enum type
- do not instantiate an enum using new, even though enumerations define a class type

> NewEnum ne = NewEnum.Member1;

##### compared for equality by using ==
> if (ne == NewEnum.Member2) //..

- when using switch, the type of enumeration in the **switch** expression has already implicitly specified the **enum** type of the **case** constants
- enum type in case cause a compilation error (?)

> switch(ne) {
>   case Member1:
>       //..
>   case Member2:

##### print the name
> System.out.println(NewEnum.Member1); // print Member1

### 1.2 The value() and valueOf() Methods

##### All enumerations automatically contain two predefined methods
- values()
    + > public static enum-type [] values()
    + returns an array that contains a list of the enumeration constants
- valueOf()
    + > public static enum-type valueOf(String str)
    + returns the enumeration constant whose value corresponds to the string passed in str

### 1.3 Java Enumerations Are Class Types

##### enum defines a class
- could give constructors, add instance variables and methods, and implement interface..

```java
enum NewEnum {
    Member1(10), Member2(20);

    private int no;

    NewEnum(int n) { no = n; } // Constuctor

    NewEnum() { no = -1; } // Overloaded constructor

    int getNo() { return no; }
}

```

##### two restrictions
1. an enumeration can't inherit another class.
2. an enum cannot be a superclass. - an enum can't be extended

### 1.4 Enumerations Inherit Enum

##### all enumerations automatically inherit java.lang.Enum. (even can't inherit another class)
- three of its methods
    + ordinal() retrieve ordinal value - begin at zero
        * final int ordinal()
    + compareTo() compares ordinal value
        * final int compareTo(enum-type e)
    + equals() check if equals - like "=="

### 1.5 Another Enumeration Example
..an example in the book..

## 2. Type Wrappers

the primitive types are not part of the object hierarchy, and they do not inherit *Object*.

### 2.1 Character

wrapper around a **char**
> Character(char ch) // constructor
> 
> char charValue() // to obtain the *char* value contained in a Character object.

### 2.2 Boolean

wrapper around **boolean** value
> Boolean(boolean boolValue) // constructor1. true or false
> Boolean(String boolString) // constructor2. true when "true" (in uppercase or lowercase), otherwise, false
> 
> boolean booleanValue()

### 2.3 The Numeric Type Wrappers

all of the numeric type wrappers inherit the *abstract* class *Number*.
> // methods returns value from Number. for manually un-boxing
> byte byteValue()
> double doubleValue()
> float floatValue()
> int intValue()
> long longValue()
> short shortValue()

> // all numeric type wrappers define constructors with a give value, or a string representation of that value
> Integer(int num)
> Integer(String str)

## 3. Autoboxing

Beginning with JDK 5 -> features: autoboxing and auto-unboxing

1. Autoboxing is the process by which a primitive type is automatically encapsulated (boxed) into its equivalent type wrapper whenever an object of that type is needed.
    + primitive to wrapper
2. Auto-unboxing is the process by which the value of a boxed object is automatically extracted (unboxed) from a type wrapper when its value is needed.
    + wrapper to primitive type

### 3.1 Autoboxing and Methods

automatically occurs whenever a primitive type must be converted into an object, or the other way round.

### 3.2 Autoboxing/Unboxing Occurs in Expressions

e.g.
++intObject

- auto-unboxs intObject, performs the increment, and then reboxes the result back into intObject.

e.g.
doubleObject = intObject + doubleObject

- unbox -> sum -> autobox

e.g.
if(intObject == 1)

### 3.3 Autoboxing/Unboxing Boolean and Character Values

e.g.
if(booleanObject)

- auto-unbox

### 3.4 Autoboxing/Unboxing Helps Prevent Errors

autoboxing always creates the proper object, and auto-unboxing always produces the proper value

### 3.5 A Word of Warning

each autobox and auto-box adds overhead that is not present if the primitive type is used.

In general, should restrict use of the type wrappers to only those cases in which an object representation of a preimitive type is required.

## 4. Annotations (Metadata)

since JDK 5 

- a feature to embed supplemental information (annotation) into a source file.
    + this information can be used during both development and deployment.

### 4.1 Annotation Basics

##### An annotation is created through a mechanism based on the interface.
```java
// e.g.
@interface NewAnno {
    String str();
    int val();
}
```

- @interface tells the compiler that an annotation type is being declared
- All annotations consist solely of method declarations without bodies. (Java implements these methods (act much like fileds))

##### An annotation cannot include an *extends* clause. however, automatically extends the *Annotation* interface.
- Annotation is a super-interface of all annotations
    + java.lang.annotation package
    + overrides hashCode(), equals(), and toString() from Object
    + annotationType() returns a Class object that represents the invoking annotation.

##### annotations can be used on declarations and, from JDK 8, also any type of declaration.
```java
// annotate a method with above example
@NewAnno(str = "Annotation Excample", val = 100)
public static void myMethod() { //...
}
```

- no parentheses after the members of annotation

### 4.2 Specifying a Retention Policy

##### A retention policy determines at what point an annotation is discarded.
- Java defines threee policies encapsulated within java.lang.annotation.RententionPolicy enumeration.
    + SOURCE: is retained only in the source file and is discarded during compilation
    + CLASS: is stored in the .class file during compilation and is not avaiable through the JVM  during run time
    + RUNTIME: is stored in the .class file during compilation and is available through the JVM during run time.
- An annotation on a local variable declaration is not retained in the .class file

##### a retention policy is specified by using a Java's built-in annotation - @Retention
> @Retention(retention-policy)

- must be one of that enumeration constants
- default policy - CLASS
```java 
// e.g.
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@interface NewAnno {
    //..
}
```

### 4.3 Obtaining Annotations at Run Time by Use of Reflection

The annotation with a retention policy of RUNTIME can be queried at run time through the use of reflection.

##### Reflection is the feature that enables information about a class to be obtained at run time.
- The reflection API is contained in the java.lang.reflect package
- using reflection to obtain annotation
    + obtaining a Class object that represents the class
        * Class is a Java's built-in class in java.lang
        * getClass() (defined by Objact) to obtain a Class object
        * > final Class<?> getClass()
    + using Class object's mehtods to obtain information of the class
        * getMethod(), getField(), and getConstructor() .. methods
        * > Method getMethod(String methName, Class<?> ... paramTypes)
        * NoSuchMethodException when can't be found
    + obtain a specific annotation associated with that object
        * ```<A extends Annotation> getAnnotation(Class<A> annoType)```
        * annoType is a Class object of the annotation
        * returns a reference to the annotation
        * null if not found (only RUNTIME can be found)

```java
import java.lang.annotation.*;
import java.lang.reflect.*;
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@interface MyAnno {
    String str();
    int val();
}

class Meta {
    // Annotate a method
    @MyAnno(str = "Annotation Example", val = 100)
    public static void myMeth () { //if have parameters (e.g. String s, int i), passing Class object when calling getMethod() (e.g. getMethod("myMeth", String.class, int.class))
        Meta ob = new Meta();

        try {
            // get a Class object that represents this class
            Class<?> c = ob.getClass();

            // get a Method object that represents this method
            Method m = c.getMethod("myMeth"); //if have parameters (e.g. String s, int i), passing Class object when calling getMethod() (e.g. getMethod("myMeth", String.class, int.class))

            // get the annotation for this class
            MyAnno anno = m.getAnnotation(MyAnno.class);

            // get list of annotations:
            // Annotation annos[] = ob.getClass().getAnnotations();
            // annos[] = m.getAnnotations();

            // display the values (like calling a method of anno)
            System.out.println(anno.str() + " " + anno.val());
        } catch (NoSuchMethodException exc) {
            //..
        }
    }

    public static void main(String args[]) {
        myMeth();
    }
}
// output: Annotation Example 100
```

### 4.4 The AnnotationElement Interface

##### supports reflection for annotations and is implemented by the classes Method, Field, Constructor, Class, and Package, among others.
java.lang.reflect

### 4.5 Using Default Values

##### give annotation members default values
> type member() default value; // value must be compatible with type

### 4.6 Marker Annotations

##### A marker annotation is a special kind of annotation that contains no members.
- to check if a marker annotation is present -> isAnnotationPresent() from AnnotationElement
- > if(m.isAnnotationPresent(MyMarkerAnno.class)) //..

### 4.7 Single-Member Annotations

##### contains only one member and allows a shorthand form of specifying the value of the member.
- dont' need to specify the name of the member
- name of the member MUST be **value**
- can have other member but must with default value

### 4.8 The Built-In Annotations

- Most are specialized, but nine are general purpose.
- java.lang.annotation
    + @Retention
    + @Documented
    + @Target
    + @Inherited
- java.lang
    + @Override
    + @Deprecated
    + @FunctionalInterface
    + @SafeVarargs
    + @SuppressWarnings

## 5. Type Annotations

Beginning with JDK 8, annotations can also be specified in most cases in which a type is used.

##### can be used on types, such as..
- return type of a method
- the type of *this* within a method
- a cast
- array levels
- an inherited class
- a *throws* clause
- generic types, including.. 
    + generic type parameter bounds
    + generic type arguments

##### must include ElementType.TYPE_USE as a target using @Target

..more examples with more details in the book..

## 6. Repeating Annotations

new JDK 8 annotation feature enables an annotation to be repoeated on the same element. (java.lang.annotation)

- must be annotated with the @Repeatable annotation where value field is the container type
- the container is a annotation for which the value field is an array of the repeatable annotation

```java
// imports...

// repeatable annotation
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@Repeatable(MyRepeatedAnnos.class) // class object of container annotation
@interface MyAnno {
    String str() default "Testing";
    int val() default 9000;
}

// the container annotation
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@interface MyRepeatedAnnos {
    MyAnno[] value(); // array of repeatable annotation
}

// class with repeated annotations(like below) on a method 
// @MyAnno(str = "First anno", val = -1)
// @MyAnno(str = "Second anno", val = 100)

```

##### two ways to obtain the repeated annotations
- use getAnnotation() with class of container annotation
    + > Annotation anno = m.getAnnotation(MyRepeatedAnnos.class);
- use getAnnotationsByType() with class of repeatable annotation (new in JDK8)
    + > Annotation[] annos = m.getAnnotationsByType(MyAnno.class);

### 6.1 Some Restrictions

- no annotation can inherit another
- all methods declared by an annotation must be without parameters
- all methods must return one of the following
    + A primitive type
    + An object of type String or Class
    + An enum type
    + Another annotation type
    + An array of one of the preceding types
- annotation cannot be generic. i.e. they cannot take type parameters.
- methods cannot specify a throws clause