# C14 Generics

introduced by JDK 5

## 1. What Are Generics

##### means *parameterized types*, uses to create classes, interfaces, and methods in which the type of data upon which they operate is specified as a parameter.

## 2. A Simple Generics Example

```java
class Gen<T> { // T is the name of a "type parameter". Gen is a generic class or "parameterized type"
    T ob;

    Gen(T o) {
        ob = o;
    }

    T getob() {
        return ob;
    }
}

// Gen<Integer> iob; // Integer is a "type argument"

```

- The Java compiler does not actually create different version of any generic class.
- The compiler removes all generic type information, substituting the necessary casts, to make the code behave as if a specific version of a generic class were created.
    + removing generic type information is called *erasure*

..need to be clarify later..

### 2.1 Generics Work Only with Reference Types

When declaring an instance of a generic type, the type argument passed to the type parameter must be a reference type. i.e. cannot use a primitive type

### 2.2 Generic Types Differ Based on Their Type Arguments

a reference of one specific version of a genenric type is not type compatible with another vesion of the same generic type. e.g. Gen<Integer> object cannot be assigned (=) with Gen<String> object. 

### 2.3 How Generics Improve Type Safety

generics automatically ensure the type safety of all operations and eliminate the need to enter casts and to type-check by hand. (comparing to non-generic (i.e. using Object))

## 3. A Generic Class with Two Type Parameters

To specify two or more type parameters, use a comma-separated list.
> class TwoGen<T, V> { //..

## 4. The General Form of the Generic Class

declaring a generic class
> class class-name<type-param-list> { //..

declaring a reference and instance creation
> class-name<type-arg-list> var-name = new class-name<type-arg-list>(cons-arg-list);

## 5. Bounded Types

to limit the types that can be passed to a type parameter

- ```<T extends superclass>```
This specifies that T can only be replaced by superclass, or subclasses of superclass. -> superclass defines an inclusive, upper limit.

- can also use one or more interface types, or mixed class and interfaces.
- ```class Gen<T extends MyClass & MyInterface> { //..```
- connected by &

## 6. Using Wildcard Arguments

To create a generic method, use the wildcard argument.
> e.g. boolean sameAve(Stats<?> ob) { //..

- ? represents an unknown type

### 6.1 Bounded Wildcards

- upper bound
    + ```<? extends superclass>```
- lower bound
    + ```<? super subclass>```
    + only classes that are superclasses of subclass are acceptable arguments

## 7. Creating a Generic Method

- ```<type-param-list> ret-type meth-name(param-list) { //..```
- can use normal call syntax. the types of the arguments are automatically discerned.
```java 
static <T extend Comparable<T>, V extends T> boolean isIn(T x, V[] y) { //..
    // T has to extend Comparable interface
    // V has to be subclass of T
    // otherwise, compiler error
}
// isIn(2, nums) // type is Integer
```

### 7.1 Generic Constructors

constructors can be generic, even their class is not

## 8. Generic Interfaces

##### In general, a generic interface is declared in the same way as is a generic class.
- the inplementing class must specify the same bound
- it is incorrect to specify the bound again in the *implements* clause.
- the subclass should be genenric. or should implements a specific type of genenric interface
    + ```class SubClass implements GenInterface<T> { // Wrong```
        * ```class SubClass<T> implements GenInterface<T> { // OK```
    + ```class SubClass implements GenInterface<Integer> { // OK```

##### syntax
- generic interface
    + ```interface interface-name<type-param-list> { //..```
- implementing interface
    + ```class class-name<type-param-list> implements interface-name<type-arg-list> {```

## 9. Raw Types and Legacy Code

##### use generic class without any type arguments which creates a raw type for the class
- to solved the compatiable issue with code prior to JDK 5 (shoud not use for new code)
- a raw type is not type safe

## 10. Generic Class Hierarchies

##### The key difference between generic and non-generic hierarchies
- in a generic hierarchy, any type arguments needed by a generic superclass must be passed up the hierarchy by all subclasses.

### 10.1 Using a Generic Superclass

```java 
class Gen2<T> extends Gen<T> { /*..*/ } // must specify the type parameter required by superclass
class Gen2<T, V> extends Gen<T> { /*..*/ } // more parameter in subclass
class Gen2 extends Gen<String> { /*..*/ } // subclass is non-generic
```

### 10.2 A Generic Subclass

```java 
class Gen<T> extends NonGen { /*..*/ } 
```

### 10.3 Run-Time Type Comparisons Within a Generic Hierarchy

The instanceof operator can be applied to objects of generic classes.

### 10.4 Casting

can casting one instance of a generic class into another only if the two are otherwise compatible and their type arguments are the same
```
(Gen<Integer>) iobj
```

### 10.5 Overriding Methods in a Generic Class

A method in a generic class can be overridden 

## 11. Type Inference with Generics

```java
// before JDK 7
MyClass<Integer, String> mcob = new MyClass<Integer, String>(1, "test");

// after JDK 7
MyClass<Integer, String> mcob = new MyClass<>(1, "test");

```

##### type-inference syntax to shorten the long declaration statements
- ```class-name<type-arg-list> var-name = new class-name<>(cons-arg-list);```
- the *dismond* operator ```<>```

## 12. Erasure

to avoid breaking order code.

##### when Java code is compiled, all generic type information is removed(erased) by..
- replacing type parameters with their bound type (Object if no explicit bound)
- applying the appropriate casts with the types specified by the type arguments

##### no type parameters exist at run time for generics

### 12.1 Bridge Methods

The compiler, occasionally, add a bridge method to a class to handle situations in which the type erasure of an overriding method in a subclass does not preduce the same erasure as the method in the superclass.

```java
class Gen2 extends Gen<String> {
    Gen2(String s) {
        super(s);
    }
    // A string-specific override of "T getob()";
    String getob() { 
        // expecting return Object, because of type erasure
        // compiler generates bridge method "java.lang.Object getob()"
        return ob;
    }
}
```

## 13. Ambiguity Errors

##### Ambiguity errors occur when erasure causes two seemingly distinct generic declarations to resolve the the same erased type, causing a conflict.

```java
class Gen<T, V> {
    T t;
    V v;
    // These two overloaded methods are ambiguous and will not compile
    void set(T t) {
        this.t = t;
    }
    void set(V v) {
        this.v = v;
    }
}
```

## 14. Some Generic Restrictions

### 14.1 Type Parameters Can't Be Instantiated

```java
class Gen<T> {
    T t;
    Gen() {
        this.t = new T(); // Illegal. Compiler does not know the type. T is a place holder
    }
}
```

### 14.2 Restrictions on Static Members

- No static member can use a type parameter declared by the enclosing class
- static genric method is allowed

### 14.3 Generic Array Restrictions

1. cannot instantiate an array whose element type is a type parameter.
    + in class itself, new T[10] is illegal
2. cannot create an array of type-specific generic references.
    + when using class, ```Gen<Integer> g[] = new Gen<Integer>[10]``` is wrong
    + ```Gen<?> g[] = new Gen<?>[10]``` is OK

### 14.4 Generic Exception Restriction
A generic class cannot extend Throwable.