# C15 Lambda Expressions

- Added by JDK 8
- enhance Java
    + add new syntax elements that increase the expressive power of the language.
    + new capabilities being incorporated into the API library.

## 1. Introducing Lambda Expressions

- A **lambda expression** is, essentially, an anonymous (that is, unnamed) method.
    + commonly as *closures*
- A **functional interface** is an interface that contains one and only one abstract method.

### 1.1 Lambda Expression Fundamentals

##### lambda operator / arrow operator (```->```)
- the left side specifies any parameters required by the lambda expression.
- the right side is *lambda body*, which specifies the actions of the lambda expression.
    + two types of lambda body
        * consists of a single expression
            - also called *expression bodies*
            - ```() -> 123.45```
            - ```(n) -> (n % 2)==0```
        * consists of a block of code
            - also called *expression lambdas*

### 1.2 Functional Interfaces

##### interface with only one abstract method (cannot be default method)
```java
// Create a reference to a MyNumber instance.
MyNumber myNum;
// Use a lambda in an assignment context
myNum = () -> 123.45;
```

- an instance of a class is automatically created that implements the functional interface, with the lambda expression defining the behavior of the abstract method declared by the functional interface.

### 1.3 Some Lambda Expression Examples

```java
interface NumericTest {
    boolean test(int n, int d);
}
class LambdaDemo {
    public static void main(String args[]) {
        NumericTest isFactor = (n, d) -> (n % d) == 0;

        if(isFactor.test(10, 2))
            System.out.println("2 is a factor of 10");
    }
}
```

## 2. Block Lambda Expressions
also called block body or block lambda

- must explicitly use return statement to return a value (not like single expression)

## 3. Generic Functional Interface

- a lambda expression cannot be generic
    + because a lambda expression, itself, cannot specify type parameters.
- the functional interface associated with a lambda expression can be generic
    + the target type of the lambda expression is determined by the type argument or arguments specified when a functional interface reference is declared.

```java
interface SomeFunc<T> {
    T func(T t);
}
class GenericFunctionalInterfaceDemo {
    SomeFunc<String> duplicate = (str) -> str + str;
    System.out.println(duplicate.func("test"));
    SomeFunc<Integer> double = (n) -> n + n;
    System.out.println(double.func(2));
}
```

## 4. Passing Lambda Expressions as Arguments

##### a lambda expression can be used in any context that provides a target type. e.g. passed as an arguemnt
- the type of parameter receiving the lambda expression argument must be of a functional interface type compatible with the lambda.

## 5. Lambda Expressions and Exceptions

##### A lambda expression can throw an exception
- if throws a checked exception, the exception must be compatible with the exceptions listed in throws clause of the abstract method (i.e. declare exception on method in the interface)

## 6. Lambda Expressions and Variable Capture

##### Variables defined by the enclosing scope of a lambda expression are accessible within the lambda expression
- variable capture is a special situation created when a lambda expression uses a local variable
- only use local variables that are *effectively final* (its value does not change after first assign)

```java
int num = 10;
MyFunc myLambda = (n) -> {
    int v = num + n;
    // num++; // illegal
    return v;
};
// num = 9; // cause an error, because it would remove the effective final status
```

## 7. Method Reference

A method reference provides a way to refer to a method without executing it

### 7.1 Method References to static Methods

to create a static methodNameod reference
> ClassName::methodName

..more detail in the book..

### 7.2 Method References to Instance Methods

to pass a reference to an instance method on a specific object
> objRef::methodName

..more detail in the book..

### 7.3 Method References with Generics

..more detail in the book..

## 8. Constructor References

create references to constructors
> classname::new

..more detail in the book..

## 9. Predefined Functional Intefaces

in many cases, won't need to define functional interface

JDK 8 provides several predefined functional interface in java.util.function
- ```UnaryOperator<T>```
    + method T apply(T)
- ```BinaryOperator<T>```
    + method T apply(T)
- ```Consumer<T>```
    + method T accept(T)
- ```Supplier<T>```
    + method T get()
- ```Function<T, R>```
    + method R apply(T)
- ```Predicate<T>```
    + method boolean test(T)