# C17 Exploring java.lang

classes and interfaces defined by java.lang

## 1. Primitive Type Wrappers

.. to be added ..

## 2. Void

The *Void* class has one field, TYPE, which holds a reference to the *Class* object for type void

## 3. Process

- abstract Process class encapsulates a process which is an executing program
- it is used primarily as a superclass for the type of objects created 
    + by exec() in the Runtime class
    + or, by start() in the ProcessBuilder class

## 4. Runtime

##### The Runtime class encapsulates the run-time environment
- cannot instantiate a Runtime object
- can get a reference to the current Runtime object
    + by calling the static method Runtime.getRuntime()

### 4.1 Memory Management

to know how large the object heap is and how much of it is left

- totalMemory()
- freeMemory()

```java
// e.g. use with gc()
Runtime r = Runtime.getRuntime();
System.out.println(r.totalMemory());
System.out.println(r.freeMemory()); // free memory
r.gc(); // run the garbage collector
System.out.println(r.freeMemory()); // free memory after gc
```

### 4.2 Executing Other Programs

##### use Java to execute other heavyweight processes (i.e. programs) on multitasking operation system
- exec() method 
    + to name the program and its input parameters
    + returns a Process object
    + is inherently environment-dependent

```java
// launch notepad from Windows
Runtime r = Runtime.getRuntime();
Process p = null;
try {
    p = r.exec("notepad");
    // getOutputStream() and getInputStream() return the handles to standard out and in
    p.waitFor(); //wait until the subprocess finishes
} catch (Exception e) {
}
System.out.println(p.exitValue()); // print the value returned by subprocess
```

## 5. ProcessBuilder

start and manage process with more control.
> ProcessBuilder(List<String> args) // the name of program followed by command-line arguments
> ProcessBuilder(String ... args)

```java
// create an instance 
ProcessBuilder proc = new ProcessBuilder("notepad.exe", "testfile");
// to begin execution of the program
proc.start();
```

## 6. System

The System class holds a collection of static methods and variables.

### 6.1 Using currentTimeMillis() to Time Program Execution
> long start = System.currentTimeMillis();
> // do something
> long end = System.currentTimeMillis();
> System.out.println(end - start);

### 6.2 Using arraycopy()
> System.arrayCopy...

### 6.3 Environment Properties
> System.getProperty...
> e.g. System.getProperty("user.dir"); // path to current user directory

## 7. Object
Object is a superclass of all other classes.

## 8. Using clone() and the Cloneable Interface
> Object clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException

.. to be added ..

## 9. Class

- Class encapsulates the run-time state of a class or interface.
- Objects of type Class are created automatically, when classes are loaded.
- getClass()

## 10. ClassLoader

- The abstract class ClassLoader defines how classes are loaded.
- creating subclasses that extend ClassLoader, implementing its methods to load classes in some way other than loaded by Java run-time system
- not normally need to do

## 11. Math
- The Math class contains floating-point functions
- Math defines two double constants: E and PI

### 11.1 Trigonometric Functions
sin, cos, tan...

### 11.2 Exponential Functions
cbrt(cube root), exp, log...

### 11.3 Rounding Functions
abs, ceil, floor...

### 11.4 Miscellaneous Math Methods
some methods use the suffix Exact were added by JDK 8. They throw an ArithmeticException if overflow occurs

addExact...

## 12. StrictMath

- The StrictMath class defines a complete set of methematical methods that parallel those in Math.
- The StrictMath version is guaranteed to generate precisely identical results across all Java implementations.

## 13. Compiler
not for normal programming use

## 14. Thread, ThreadGroup, and Runable
support multithreadec programming

### 14.1 The Runable Interface

### 14.2 Thread

### 14.3 ThreadGroup
creates a group of threads

## 15. ThreadLocal and InheritableThreadLocal
two additional thread-related classes in java.lang

## 16. Package
Package encapsulates version data associated with a package

## 17. RuntimePermission
relates to Java's security mechanism

## 18. Throwable
supports Java's exception-handling system

## 19. SecurityManager
supports Java's security system
> System.getSecurityManager

## 20. StackTraceElement
- The StackTraceElement class describes a single *stack frame*
    + the stack frame is an individual element of a stack trace when an exception occurs.
    + each stack frame represents an *execution point*
        * execution point includes: the name of the class, the name of the method, the name of the file and the source-code line number
- An array of StackTraceElements is returned by the getStackTrace() method of the Throwableclass
- > StackTraceElement(String className, String methName, String fileName, int line)

## 21. Enum
- All enumerations automatically inherit Enum
- Enum is a generic class
    + ```class Enum<E extends Enum<E>>```

## 22. ClassValue
can be used to associate a value with a type

## 23. The CharSequence Interface
defines methods that grant read-only access to a sequence of characters.

## 24. The Comparable Interface
- Object of classes that implement Comparable can be ordered
- declares one method that is used to determine the *natural ordering* of instances of a class.
    + int compareTo(T obj)
    + return 0 if equal, negative value if invoking object has a lower value

## 25. The Appendable Interface
- objects can have a character or character sequences appended to it
- defines methods
    + Appendable append(char ch) throws IOException
    + Appendable append(CharSequence chars) throws IOException
    + Appendable append(CharSequence chars, int begin, int end) throws IOException

## 26. The Iterable Inteface
- must be implemented in order to be used by for-each loop
- ```interface Iterable<T>```
- one abstract method: ```Iterator<T> iterator()```
- beginning with JDK 8, two default methods
    + ```default void forEach(Consumer<? super T> action)```
    + ```default Spliterator<T> spliterator()```

## 27. The Readable Interface
- indicate an object can be used as a source for charaters
- one method: ```int read(CharBuffer buf) throws IOException```

## 28. The AutoCloseable Interface
- provides support for the try-with-resources statement, which implements *automatic resource management* (ARM)
- only objects of classes that implement AutoCloseable can be used with try-with-resources.
- defines one method: ```void close() throw Exception```

## 29. The Thread.UncaughtExceptionHandler Interface
static interface is implemented by classes that want to handle uncaught exceptions

## 30. The java.lang Subpackages

java.lang.annotation
java.lang.instrument
java.lang.invoke
java.lang.management
java.lang.ref
java.lang.reflect

.. to be added ..
