# C2. An Overview of Java

## 1. Object-Oriented Programming

##### Object-oriented programming (OOP) is at the core of Java.
In fact, all Java programs are to at least some extent object-orientied.

### 1.1 Two Paradigms

##### All computer programs consist of two elements: code and data.
- Furthermore, a program can be conceptually organized around its data.
    1. Some programs are written around "*what is happening*"
    2. Ohters are written around "*who is being affected*"
- There are two paradigms that govern how a program is constructed.
    1. process-oriented model
        *code acting on data* - characterizeds a program as a series of linear steps
    2. object-oriented model
        *data controlling access to code* - organizes a program around its data and a set of well-defined interfaces to that data

### 1.2 Abstraction

##### An essential element of object-oriented programming - *abstraction*
- think of a car as a well-defined object with its own unique behavior.
- utilize the object as a whole.

### 1.3 The Three OOP Principles

All object-oriented programming languages provide mechanisms that help you implement the object-oriented model.

##### 1. **Encapsulation**
- *Encapsulation* is the mechanism that binds together code and the data it manipulates, and keeps both safe from outside interference and misuse.
    + a protective wrapper that prevents the code and data from being arbitrarily accessed by other code defined outside the wrapper.
- *Class* is the basis of encapsulation in Java.
    + A *class* defines the structure and behavior (data and code) that will be shared by a set of objects. **a class is a logical construct**
    + Each *object* of a given class contains the structure and behavior defined by the class. (instances of a class) **an object has physical reality**
- specify the code and data (both are *members* of the class) that constitute the class when create the class
    1. data - as *member variables* or *instance variables*
    2. code - as *member methods* or *method*
- the purpose of a class is to encapsulate complexity. Therefore,
    1. public
    2. private

##### 2. **Inheritance**
- *Inheritance* is the process by which one object acquires the properties of another object.

##### 3. **Polymorphism**
- *Polymorphism* is a feature that allows one interface to be used for a general class of actions.
- one interface, multiple methods - a generic interface to a group of related activities
    + reduce complexity by allowing the same interface to be used to specify a general class of action. (compiler select the specific action as each situation)

##### 4. Polymorphism, Encapsulation, and Inheritance Work Together

## 2. A First Simple Program

### 2.1 Entering the Program

### 2.2 Compiling the Program

### 2.3 A Closer Look at the First Sample Program

## 3. A Second Short Program

## 4. Two Control Statements

### 4.1 The if Statement

- if(condition) statement;
    condition is a Boolean expression

### 4.2 The for Loop

- for(initialization; condition; iteration) statement;

## 5. Using Blocks of Code

- two or more statements to be grouped into *block of code*, also called *code blocks*.

## 6. Lexical Issues

### 6.1 Whitespace

- space, tab, or newline

### 6.2 Identifiers

- uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, or the underscore and dollar-sign characters (not intended for general use).
- case-sensitive

### 6.3 Comments

- single-line, multiline and documentation comment

### 6.4 Separators

- Parentheses(()), Braces({}), Brackets([]), Semicolon(;), Comma(,), Period(.) and Colons(::)(Added by JDK8)

### 6.5 The Java Keywords

## 7. The Java Class Libraries

Java as a totality is a combineation of the Java language itself, plus its standard classes.