# C3. Data Types, Variables, and Arrays

## 1. Java Is a Strongly Typed Language

##### means:
1. Every variable has a type, everyexpression has a type, and every type is strictly defined.
2. All assignments, whether explicit or via parameter passing in the method calls, are checked for type compatibility.

## 2. The Primitive Types

##### Java defines eight primitive (*simple*) types of data: byte, short, int, long, char, float, double, and boolean. Four groups:
1. **Integers** - **byte**, **short**, **int**, and **long** - whole-valued signed numbers.
2. **Floating-point numbers** - **float** and **double** - numbers with fractional precision
3. **Characters** - **char** - symbols in a character set, like letters and numbers.
4. **Boolean** - **boolean** - a special type for representing true/false values.

They form the basis for all other types of data that you can create.

##### Although Java is otherwise completely object-orientied, the primitive types are not.

The reason for this is efficiency.

##### all data types have a strictly defined range.

## 3. Integers

##### four integer types: byte, short, int, and long.
- All of these are signed, positive and negative values.

Name | Width
--- | ---
long | 64
int | 32
short | 16
byte | 8

### 3.1 byte

a signed 8-bit type that has a range from -129 to 127.

### 3.2 short

a signed 16-bit type. range from -32,768 to 32,767.

### 3.3 int

a signed 32-bit type that has a range from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.

- when *byte* and *short* values are used in an expression, they are *promoted* to *int* when the expression is evaluated.

### 3.4 long

a signed 64-bit type.

## 4. Floating-Point types

##### also known as *real* numbers

are used when evaluating expressions that require fractional precision.

Name | Width in Bits
--- | ---
double | 64
float | 32

### 4.1 float

a *single-precision* value that uses 32 bits of storage.

### 4.2 double

double precision

- faster than single precision on some modern precessors that have been optimized for high-speed mathematical calculations.
- All transcendental math functions (sin(), cos() and sqrt()) return *double* values.

## 5. Characters

Java uses *Unicode* to represent characters.

- char is a 16-bit type. The range of a char is 0 to 65,536. There are no negative chars.

##### In the formal specification for Java, char is referred to as an integreal type (same general category as int, short, long and byte)
char is commonly considered to be in a category of its own.

## 6. Booleans

true or false

- print as "true" or "false"

## 7. A Closer Look at Literals

### 7.1 Integer Literals

### 7.2 Floating-Point Literals

### 7.3 Boolean Literals

### 7.4 Character Literals

### 7.5 String Literals


## 8. Variables