# C6. Introducing Classes

## 1. Class Fundamentals

## 2. Declaring Objects

## 3. Assigning Object Reference Variables

##### When you assign one object reference variable to another object reference variable, you are not creating a copy of the object, you are only making a copy of the reference.
- both refer to the same object. 
- not linked in any other way. -> set one to *null* will *unhook* it from original object without affecting the other one.

## 4. Introducing Methods

## 5. Constructors

## 6. The this Keyword

## 7. Garbage Collection

##### Java handles deallocation automatically
When no references to an object exist, that object is assumed to be no longer needed, and the memory occupied by the object can be reclaimed.

##### Garbage collection only occurs sporadically (if at all) during the execution of your program.
- It will not occur simply because one or more objects exist that are no longer used.
- Different Java run-time implementations will take varying approaches to garbage collection. (don't have to think about it while programming)

## 8. The finalize() Method

##### finalization
- define specific actions that will occur when an object is just about to be reclainmed by the garbage collector.
-  could be used to make sure the resources are freed before an object is destroyed, when an object is holding some non-Java resource such as a file handle or character font.

##### finalize() is only called just prior to garbage collection
- cannot know when - or even if - finilize() will be executed
- The program should provide other means of releasing system resources, etc., used by the object.

## 9. A Stack Class
..just an example in the book..