# C7. A Closer Look at Methods and Classes

## 1. Overloading Methods

##### define two or more mothods within the same class that share the same name, as long as their parameter declarations are different.
Method overloading is one of the ways that Java supports polymorphism.

##### Java uses the type and/or number of arguments as its guide to determine which version of the overloaded method to actually call.
- In some cases, Java's automatic type conversions can play a role in overload resolution.

### 1.1 Overloading Constructors

After overloading constructer with parameters, the default constructer (without parameter) will be not available.

## 2. Using Objects as Parameters

e.g. construct a new object so that it is initially the same as some existing object.

## 3. A Closer Look at Argument Passing

##### There are two ways that a computer language can pass an argument to a subroutine.
1. call-by-value
    This approach copies the value of an argument into the formal parameter of the subroutime. Therefore, changes made to the parameter of the subroutime have **no** effect on the argument.
2. call-by-reference
    In this approach, a reference to an argument (**not** the value of the argument) is passed to the parameter. Inside the subroutine, this reference is used to access the actual argument specified in the call.
    This means that the changes made to the parameter will affect the argument used to call the subroutine.

##### Java uses call-by-value to pass all arguments, the precise effect differs whether a primitive type or reference type is passed.
When you create a variable of a class type, you are only creating a reference to an object. Thus, when you pass this reference to a method, the parameter that receives it will refer to the same object as that referred to by the argument.

##### When an object reference is passed to a method, the reference itself is passed by use of call-by-value. 
However, since the value being passed refers to an object, the copy of that value will still refer to the same object that its corresponding argument does.

## 4. Returning Objects

##### A method can return any type of date
including the class types that you create.

## 5. Recursion

##### Recursion is the process of defining something in terms of itself.
- As it relates to Java programming, recursion is the attribute that allows a method to call itself.
- A method that calls itself is said to be *recursive*.

##### Recursive versions of many routines may execute a bit more slowly than the iterative equivalent because of the added overhead of the additional method calls.
- Many recursive calls to a method could cause a stack overrun.
- When the stack is exhausted with new copies of parameters and local variables, the Java run-time system will cause an exception.

##### The main advantage to recursive methods is that they can be used to create clearer and simpler versions of several algorithms that can their iterative relatives.
Some algorithms (e.g. QuickSort) are quite difficult to implement in an iterative way.

##### must have an *if* statement somewhere to force the method to return without the recursive call being executed.
Otherwise, it will never return.

## 6. Introducing Access Control

##### Thourgh encapsulation, you can control what parts of a program can access the members of a class.

##### Java's access modifiers are public, private, and protected. Java also defines a default access level.
- **protected** applies only when inheritance is involved.
- **public**, the member can be accessed by any other code.
- **private**, the member can only be accessed by other members of its class.
- no access modifier is used, the member of a class is public within its own package, but cannot be accessed outside of its package.

## 7. Understanding static

##### When a member is declared *static*, it can be accessed before any objects of its class are created, and without reference to any object.
methods and variables
e.g. main()

##### Instance variables declared as *static* are, essentially, global variables.
When objects of its class are declared, no copy of a static variable is made. Instead, all instances of the class share the same static variable.

##### restrictions of a static method
- They can only directly call other *static* method.
- They can only directly access *static* date.
- They cannot refer to *this* or *super* in any way.

##### a static block gets executed exactly once, when the class is first loaded.

```java
class UseStatic {
    static int a = 3; // first

    static {
        System.out.println("runs when loaded. before main() is called") // second
        a = 4;
    }

    public static void main(String args[]) {
        System.out.println(UseStatic.a); // last
    }
}
```

##### Outside of the class in which they are defined, *static* methods and variables can be used independently of any object.
> classname.method()

## 8. Introducing final

##### declare a field as *final* make it a constant
- must initialize a final field when it is declared
    1. give it a value when it's declared
    2. assign it a value within a constructor

- commonly all uppercase with _ in between
    
## 9. Arrays Revisited

## Arrays are implemented as object
*length* (attribute of array) to get size of array

## 10. Introducing Nested and Inner Classes

##### nested classes: a class within another class
- the enclosing class does not have access to the members of the nested class.
- two types:
    1. static
    2. non-static - inner class

## 11. Exploring the String Class

- understand String
    1. Every string is an object of type String
    2. object of type String are immutable
        - when changing a string, create a new one that contains the modifictions
        - peer classes of String: **StringBuffer** and **StringBuilder**
- '+' operator for String object
- methods in String class
> boolean equals(*secondStr*)
> int length()
> char charAt(*index*)

## 12. Using Command-Line Arguments

passing *command-line arguments* to *main*() to pass information into a program when you run it.

## 13. Varargs: Variable-Length Arguments
> Beginning with JDK5

##### Varargs (*variable-length arguments*): a feature that simplifies the creation of methods that need to take a variable number of arguments.
*variable-arity method* or *varargs method*: a method that takes a variable number of arguments.

##### A variable-length argument is specified by three periods(...)
> e.g. static void vaTest(int ... v) {
> - can be called with zero or more arguments
> - v is implicitly declared as an array of type int[]

##### A method can have "normal" parameters along with a variable-length parameter.
- the variable-length parameter must be the last
> (int a, int b, double c, int ... vals)
- only one variable-length parameter

### 13.1 Overloading Vararg Method

e.g. see below overloaded methods
> (int ...v)
> (boolean ... v)
> (String msg, int ... v)
> ()
> (int a) <- when called with only one *int* argument

### 13.2 Varargs and Ambiguity

##### unexpected errors can result- e.g.1
> (int ... v)
> (boolean ... v)
> - error when calling by ()
- e.g.2
> (int ... v)
> (int a, int ... v)
> - error when calling by (intA)