# C8. Inheritance

In Java, "subclass" inherit "superclass".

## 1. Inheritance Basics

##### *extend* keyword to inherit a class
- the subclass includes all of the members of its superclass
- superclass is a completely independent class from subclass

> class subclass-name extends superclass-name {

##### only one superclass for subclass
- no class can be a superclass of itself

### 1.1 Member Access and Inheritance

##### subclass cannot access *private* members of the superclass
- A private class member is not accessible by any code outside its class, including subclasses.

### 1.2 A More Practival Example

##### the essence of inheritance
the superclass can be inherited to form specialized classes by sdding its own unique attributes.

### 1.3 A Superclass Variable Can Reference a Subclass Object

##### the type of the reference variable - not the type of the object that it refers to - that determines what members can be accessed.
calling members based on its declared class

## 2. Using super

###### *super* keyword to refer to its immediate superclass
1. call superclass constructors
2. access a member of the superclass

### 2.1 Using super to Call Superclass Constructors

##### *super()* must always be the first statement executed inside a subclass' constructor
- > super(arg-list)
- if super() is not used -> the default or peremeterless constructor
- subclass created based on superclass (created by super())

##### super() is calling the constructor of its immediate superclass

### 2.2 A Second Use for super

##### members of superclass
situations in which member names of a subclass hide members by the same name in the superclass.
```java
// Using super to overcome name hiding.
class A {
    int i;
}
// Create a subclass by extending class A.
class B extend A {
    int i; // this i hides the i in A

    B (int a, int b) { // super() is called implicitly
        super.i = a // i in A
        i = b; // i in B   // if not "int i" in B, this i would be from A
    }
}
```

## 3. Creating a Multilevel Hierarchy

super() always refers to the constructor in the closest superclass

## 4. When Constructors Are Executed

##### in a class hierarchy, constructors complete their execution in order of derivation, from superclass to subclass.
a superclass has no knowledge of any subclass

## 5. Method Overriding

##### when a method in a subclass has the same *name and type signature* as a method in its superclass -> override the method in superclass
- always refer to the version defined by the subclass
- the version defined by the superclass will be hidden
    + --> Hiding: happen on variable and static method (when casting to superclass, then accessing the version in superclass)
    + --> Overriding: happen on regular method (even casting to superclass, accessing the subclass(dynamic/compiling) version)

[See more in Oracle Website](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/IandI/override.html)

##### *only* when *name and type signature* of two methods are identical

## 6. Dynamic Method Dispatch

##### Dynamic method dispatch is the mechanism by which a call to an overridden method is resolved at run time, rather than compile time.
- method overriding forms the basis
- this is how Java implements run-time polymorphism

##### a superclass reference variable can refer to a subclass object
*it is the type of the object being referred to* (not the type of the reference variable) that determines which version of an overridden method will be executed.

### 6.1 Why Overridden Methods?

##### run-time polymorphism
it allows a general class to specify methods that will be common to all of its derivatives, while allowing subclasses to define the specific implementation of some or all of those methods.
    
### 6.2 Applying Method Overriding
..an example in the book..

## 7. Using Abstract Classes

##### declare the structure of a given abstraction without providing a complete implementation of every method
abstract class - not fully defined, cannot be *new*

##### abstract method - subclasser responsibility
> abstract type name(parameter-list);

subclass must implement all of the abstract methods, or be abstract itself.

##### abstract class can be used to create object reference, but not be used to instantiate object.

## 8. Using final with Inheritance

##### *final* has three uses. 
1. to create the equivalent of a named constant. 
2. to prevent overriding
3. to prevent inheritance

### 8.1 Using final to Prevent Overriding

##### Mehtods declared as final cannot be overriden
a compile-time error will result

##### performance enhancement
- the complier is free to _inline_ calls to final mehtods
    + when a small final methods is called, often the Java compiler can copy the bytecode for the subroutine directly inline with the compiled code of the calling method.
    + Inlining is an option only with final methods
- late binding: resolves calls to methods dynamically, at run time. (normally in Java)
- early binding: a call resolved at compile time. (a call to final methods)

### 8.2 Using final to Prevent inheritance

##### class declared as final cannot be inherited
- Declaring a class as final implicitly declares all of its methods as final
- cannot be final and abstract at the same time

## 9. The Object Class

##### Objecrt, defined by Java, is a superclass of all other classes.
since arrays are implemeted as classes, a variable of type Object can also refer to any array.

- equals() method compares two objects
- toString() method reture a string that contains a description (automatically canlled when println())