# C9. Packages and Interfaces

## 1. Packages

##### a mechanism for partitioning the class name space into more manageable chunks. 
The package is both a naming and a visibility control mechanism.

1. can define classes inside a package that are not accessible by code outside that package.
2. can define class members that are exposed only to other members of the same package

### 1.1 Defining a Package

##### include a package command as the first statement in a Java source file. otherwise, the class name are put into the default package (has no name).
> package pkg1[.pkg2[.pkg3]];

- a package hierarchy must be reflected in the file system of your Java development system. (e.g. pkg1\pkg2\pkg3 for above case)

### 1.2 Finding Packages and CLASSPATH

##### Java run-time system is looking for
1. by default, the current working directory
2. CLASSPATH environmental variable
3. -classpath option with *java* and *javac* commands

Java is using package information to check/compare with file location to find the file/code.
[for more detail..](http://kevinboone.net/classpath.html)
[Oracle tutorials..](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/environment/paths.html)

### 1.3 A Short Package Example
..an example in the book..

## 2. Access Protection

##### access control mechanism for members of class
1. *public* can be accessed from anywhere
2. *private* cannot be seen outside its class
3. default (no modifier) is visible to subclasses and other classes in the same package
4. *protected* can be seen to all from same package and only to direct subclasses from other packages.

- | Private | No Modifier | Protected | Public
 --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
 Same class | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes
 Same package subclass | No | Yes | Yes | Yes
 Same package non-subclass | No | Yes | Yes | Yes
 Different package subclass | No | No | Yes | Yes
 Different package non-subclass | No | No | No | Yes

### 2.1 An Access Example
..an example in the book..

## 3. Importing Packages

##### import package to make classes can be referred to directly using its name
> import pkg1 [.pkg2].(classname|*);

##### all of the standard Java classes are stored in a package called *java*
**java.lang** is implicitly imprted by the compiler for all programs

## 4. Interface

can specify what a class must do

##### a class must provide the complete set of methods required by the interface

##### Interfaces disconnect the definition of a method or set of methods from the inheritance hierarchy
Since interfaces are in a different hierarchy from classes, it is possible for classes that are unrelated in terms of the class hierarchy to implement the same interface.

### 4.1 Defining an Interface

- Interface can only be declared as public (for all) or default (for within package)

- variables are implicitly *final* and *static*
- all methods and variables are implicitly *public*

### 4.2 Implementing Interfaces

>class classname [extends superclass] [implements interface1 [,interface2...]] {

##### 1. Accessing Implementations Through Interface Reference

##### 2. Partial Implementations
- abstract class

### 4.3 Nested Interfaces

##### member interface / nested interface - declared as a member of a class or another interface.
can be public, private, or protected.

### 4.4 Applying Interfaces
..an example in book..

### 4.5 Variables in Interfaces

- by default, static (shared by all instances) and final (immutable)

[More details about static and final keywords](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8005250/difference-between-a-static-and-a-final-static-variable-in-java)

### 4.6 Interfaces Can Be Extended

> interface A extends B {

## 5. Default Interface Method

default method - from JDK8

..more notes to be continued..
### 5.1 Default Method Fundamentals

### 5.2 A More Practical Example

### 5.3 Multiple Inheritance Issues

## 6. Use static Methods in an Interface

static method - from JDK8

- no implementation or instance of the interface is required to call the static method
- static interface methods are not inherited by either an implementing class or a subinterface.

## 7. Final Thoughts on Packages and Interfaces
they are used a lot...